                                      School of Computer Science

                            COMP-3300 Operating Systems Fundamentals

                                             Assignment 4



Due:

Individual assignment. Copying the work of others is prohibited for this assignment.
Objective: The aim of this assignment is to help students understand the Round Robin Scheduling
Algorithm[ Chapter-5].
Tasks:

Write a program to implement the Round Robin Scheduling Algorithm and compute the average
waiting time assuming that all processes arriving at the same time. Using the Round Robin
Scheduling Algorithm, each process gets a small unit of CPU time (time quantum q). After this
time has elapsed, the process is preempted and added to the end of the ready queue.

Input: Number of processes and burst time for each process
Output: Order of processes according to their completion time together with their waiting time and
the final average waiting time.
Hint: This video specifies how to compute the average waiting time.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7TpxxTNrcTg

Submission:

   1. You must submit: (i) a short report (in PDF or word), which contains the details of the
      implementation, the runs, and the input/output of these runs (ii) the source code of your
      programs; and (iii) snapshots of your runs. You should upload all these files to the
      Blackboard, as a single zip file called Assignment-4-{student number}. Replace {student
      number} above with your actual student number.
   2. Add the following note at the beginning of your report: “I confirm that I will keep the
      content of this assignment confidential. I confirm that I have not received any unauthorized
      assistance in preparing for or writing this assignment. I acknowledge that a mark of 0 may
      be assigned for copied work.” + Name + SID
   3. As per the course outline, late assignments will be marked off at 20% per school day late
      including the due date, up to 3 days. After which the submission is worth zero.
   4. Unlimited resubmissions are allowed. But keep in mind that we will consider/mark the last
      submission. This means that if you resubmit after the deadline, a penalty will be applied,
      even if you submitted an earlier version before the deadline.
   5. Copying the work of others will be checked. Submissions determined to be copies will be
      worth zero.
